The topic of today's talk is an interesting
property of money that I want to explore with you.
I'm calling this one "Inside Out."
Who here wants to tell me what the four properties
of money are?
What the four primary functions of a currency
are?
Anybody?
[Audience] Value exchange?
[ANDREAS] Medium of exchange, yes that's one.
Store of value, that's two.
[Audience] Fungibility?
[ANDREAS] That's not a use case for money,
but it's a property.
Two more.
Unit of account, very good.
What's the fourth one?
System-of-Control (SoC).
What? I don't remember reading that.
System of control.
Turns out, we've had money for thousands of
years, potentially tens of thousands of years.
It's really hard to tell how far back money
goes.
But the money we have today is very different
from the money we've had in the past, because
something changed in the last 50 years that
has fundamentally altered the course of money,
of currency, of this system of communicating
value to other people.
We have the three components: medium of exchange
(MoV), unit of account (UoA), and store of value (SoV).
Those have been around for millenia.
And then something happened.
In 1970, Richard Nixon signed the Bank Secrecy
Act and turned money into a system of control.
A system of control that attempts to use money
as a political tool in order to control who
is able to send and receive it, who they are
able to send money to, and aims (ultimately)
to the complete surveillance of all financial
transactions worldwide.
Complete, total, totalitarian financial surveillance.
This change 50 years ago has gradually percolated
through every country in the world,
every financial service in the world, every bank
in the world.
In 1970, Richard Nixon deputised the financial services
field to turn them into a branch of law enforcement.
Law enforcement beyond borders, beyond jurisdictions,
beyond due-process, beyond political and democratic
control, beyond recourse.
A cop can confiscate your money.
A judge can sign a warrant to freeze your
accounts.
A bank can do both of those things without
any authorisation from anyone
and there's nothing you can do about it.
This applies world-wide.
Money as a system of control supercedes all
other functions of money.
When money is turned into an enforcement tool,
the other functions start getting eroded.
It is no longer the best medium of exchange,
because its function as a medium of exchange
is subordinate to its function as a system
of law enforcement, a system of control.
At that point, the system of control aspect
starts corrupting everything.
We are now 25 years into the internet revolution.
Smartphones, cellphones, dumb phones... data
connections have propagated out to more than
2.5 billion people who have never had these
technologies before.
Where's finance?
Lagging 15 to 20 years behind.
It does not reach 2.5 billion people completely
unbanked, 4 billion people underbanked.
Really only 1.5 billion people have the full,
privileged, elite form of banking that
we enjoy in most western liberal democracies.
Even there, there are tiers of access and control.
How many people in this room are accredited investors?
Mhm, what a lovely bunch. [Laughter]
That puts you in the 1/10 of 1/10
of 1/10 percentile of the world.
There are tiers within the financial system.
Some people who have better access, some people
who have better recourse, and some people
who have complete immunity.
Some people can commit crimes against millions:
robo foreclosures, Libor fraud, rigging the gold markets.
And no one will ever go to jail. Why?
Because when money becomes a system of control,
financial services companies become deputies
in this system of enforcement and control.
As deputies, they get some perks.
One of the perks is they never go to jail.
Well, with a few exceptions; there are some
fundamental rules that always apply to our society.
Bernie Madoff went to jail, he made the fundamental
mistake of stealing from rich people.
Don't do that!
Foreclose on 10 million poor people? No problem.
Create 3.5 million fake accounts in Wells
Fargo? No problem.
Lose 143 million private records of individuals
at Equifax?
Let's see some bets.
How many executives are going to jail? None.
A system of control corrupts the very basis
of money until it can no longer function as
a medium of exchange.
And it breeds economic exclusion.
We are now 25 years into the era of the internet and
we are reaching fewer people with economic inclusion.
We are actually backtracking historically,
because increasingly entire countries are
being cut off from the world financial system.
You don't act in the best interests of the
United States?
You lose your SWIFT code, you are no longer
part of the wire transfer network.
You submit to the universal jurisdiction of
American courts, like Switzerland had to do,
or you lose access to international banking.
You lose access to the reserve currency, you
lose access to the lifeblood.
This devil's bargain has made financial services
unassailable from a point of competition.
They are surrounded by a thicket of regulations;
these regulations are not about consumer protection,
consumers are most certainly not protected.
They are most certainly about the system of
control of money.
They are about the law enforcement and policy
enforcement -- and sometimes straight up politics
enforcement -- that comes with money.
Money does not flow freely.
I have some bad news.
Those gold bars surrounding the banks and
protecting them from competition are a gilded cage.
A cage that keeps them inside a system of
regulation, that prevents competition from
the outside, but also prevents them from acting
with innovation in free markets, expanding
their business, unless they make all of that
subordinate to a system of political control.
Store of value no longer works; you cannot
store value in a currency that can be confiscated
at whim, frozen by any banker, at any point
in time.
That is not a stable store of value.
You cannot use it as your currency reserve
to buy oil with, as your foreign exchange
reserve in your country, because if you cross
the superpowers they will cut off your access.
And you will not be able to use oil.
You cannot use money as a medium of exchange
if you cannot exchange it freely with whoever you want.
Gradually, the corruption spreads and spreads.
Now, something new arrives on the horizon:
a system of money that works on a network.
That is first and foremost a medium of exchange,
a store of value, and one day (potentially)
a unit of account.
But it will never become a system of control;
it refuses to become a system of control.
In fact, its design principles are neutrality,
openness, borderless access, censorship resistance.
And now the banks can't play in that space.
They're stuck inside their guilded cage, playing
cop for the world's superpowers.
Offering economic services to a tiny fraction
of the human population.
Sacrificing 4 billion people on the altar
of poverty in order to create a nice, fake,
bourgeois sense of security among the middle
class by selling them lies.
FDIC: 'Don't worry, your money is insured.'
Right?
How many people here have FDIC or equivalent
insurance on their bank accounts?
How many Greeks do you think had insurance
on their bank accounts?
All of them. What happened to that?
Poof! in one afternoon. Vanished, with a 20% haircut.
Whose insurance? Does it insure you or does it insure the banks? What does it insure against?
Small failure, not big failure. Big failure? Uninsureable.
How many of you have money in banks?
None of you have money in banks. [Laughter]
I mean, please, you're lawyers.
You understand bailment. It's not your money.
You have an "account," which is a legal construct
that they give you in exchange for giving them
an unsecured loan of your money so that
they can finance credit to their customers.
You don't own (legally) any of the money that's
in your account!
You have a legal construct that possibly,
maybe entitles you to withdraw at the pace
that they want... unless you cross the wrong
person, go to the wrong protest, associate
with the wrong organisation, vote for the
wrong party.
Sure, maybe that's not happening in Canada,
but out of 194 countries this model of turning
money into a system of control has taken off
like wildfire.
Because it's every dictator's wet dream.
It ensures that political dissent can be snuffed
at the bank very effectively.
It is one of the most effective systems of
control that exists.
Now it has to face competition from a system
that will not do that, that cannot be made
to do that, that will not yield, that will
not be co-opted.
What's the response?
"Heh, Bitcoin is a joke. Cryptocurrencies? They're outside the system. Nobody wants to be outside the system."
Guess what? There are 6 billion people out there.
They don't want to be outside the system,
they'd much rather be inside, but they haven't
been invited and they probably won't be.
Many of them can't do the things that are
neccessary to be invited into the system.
Guess what?
There is an entire generation that has now discovered the two forms of power that come to people.
The first form is voice and the second form
is exit.
You either speak up with your voice, express
your political will, and force change.
When that doesn't work, you get to the second
most important power that all humans have.
That's exit. Borders have been erected for millenia to prevent exit, to slow down exit.
You can't easily emigrate, opt out, colonise,
depart, exit.
What happens when exit is not a physical act,
but a virtual act?
What happens when people decide to exit from
the financial system in a virtual way?
Vir-exit? Bit-exit?
You can keep the inside of the guilded cage.
It is demographically stagnated, over-leveraged,
swimming in debt, out of control, and it serves
a tiny sliver of the population. You can keep it.
An entire generation of Millenials no longer
believes that fiction of bank security, of
future possibility, of deferred earnings,
of interest rates, of mortgages.
They will exit, they are exiting in droves.
Not just here, but even more so in the countries
where the existing system of inside finance,
of control, is used despotically, opressively.
China is exiting in droves and it's barely
started.
Bitcoin has been around for nine years.
What does the insider group do?
What do the regulators do in response to a
system that cannot be regulated?
They regulate the bits they can: the exchanges,
the bank accounts, the national currency side of things.
They shut down the on-ramps and off-ramps.
They say, "We will not let you take your money
with you."
And what do Millenials say to that?
"Dude... I don't have any fucking money!
All I have is my creative potential, my spirit,
my productivity.
I can sell that directly for bitcoin without
an exchange, without an on-ramp, without an off-ramp.
When I need to buy something, I'll use my
digital currency directly without re-entering
your system - to which I was never invited.
Shut down the on-ramps, shut down the off-ramps,
and I will stay on board.
I will stay digital. I won't touch your gilded cage anymore, because I don't need you. I exit."
Thank you.